# ch32v003

Uses proprietary WCH systick.

Requires HCLK/1 and full 32bit reload value for proper handling of arithmetic underflow:
```
	SysTick->CMP = 0xffffffff;
	SysTick->CTLR = 0b1101; // of course there are no bit definitions in headers
```

findings:

unaligned long instructions seem to sometimes have 1 cycle penalty (mostly loop invariant)

loads stores are 2 cycle

unaligned (word/half) loads/stores trigger an unaligned load/store exception.
(there is no `mtval` csr register)

taken branch/jump is 
- at 0ws
- - 3 cycles
- - +1 cycle when jumping to unaligned 32bit instruction
- at 1ws:
- - 4 cycles from an older op (in synthetic scenario)
- - 5 cycles from an younger op (in synthetic scenario)
- - +1 cycle when jumping to unaligned location 
- - prior execution of 2 cycle instructions might cause a swap of the older/younger op timmings, 
addition of long instruction might further affect it (ie. return to "normal")

to set `MIE` in `mstatus` it must be written together with `MPIE`. ie. write 0x88 to enable interrupts

bits [9:2] of `mtvec` are hardwired to zero (minimum 1KiB granularity).
Entry in unvectored mode also needs to be 1KiB aligned.

The core will reset when experiencing fault while in exception handler. 
(`ebreak` without debugger also causes this)

uncore findings:

FLASH is organized in 32 bit (4byte) lines

2 waitstate option in `FLASH->ACTLR` (aka `FLASH->ACR`), which is defined in headers but stated as 
invalid in RM, seems to enable 3 or 4 waitstates. The corresponding 3ws cofig (not in headers) is also 
doing same 3 or 4 waitstates.

1920 byte area at 0x1ffff000 can be reprogrammed with custom bootloaders.
It's expected to be entered by performing system reset with `MODE` bit set in `FLASH_STATR` register.
This will cause remap to 0x00000000.

## encodings of custom instructions (aka "xw" extension)

Of course there is no wch documentation of those instructions

Using wavedrom.

### xw.c.lbu

```
{reg:[
 { bits: 2, name: 0x0, attr: ['xw.c.lbu'] },
 { bits: 3, name: 'rd\'' },
 { bits: 2, name: `uimm[2:1]` },
 { bits: 3, name: 'rs1\'' },
 { bits: 3, name: `uimm[0|4:3]` },
 { bits: 3, name: 0x1, attr: ['xw.c.lbu'] },
]}
```

### xw.c.lhu

```
{reg:[
 { bits: 2, name: 0x2, attr: ['xw.c.lhu'] },
 { bits: 3, name: 'rd\'' },
 { bits: 2, name: `uimm[2:1]` },
 { bits: 3, name: 'rs1\'' },
 { bits: 3, name: `uimm[5:3]` },
 { bits: 3, name: 0x1, attr: ['xw.c.lhu'] },
]}
```

### xw.c.sb

```
{reg:[
 { bits: 2, name: 0x0, attr: ['xw.c.sb'] },
 { bits: 3, name: 'rd\'' },
 { bits: 2, name: `uimm[2:1]` },
 { bits: 3, name: 'rs1\'' },
 { bits: 3, name: `uimm[0|4:3]` },
 { bits: 3, name: 0x5, attr: ['xw.c.sb'] },
]}
```

### xw.c.sh

```
{reg:[
 { bits: 2, name: 0x2, attr: ['xw.c.sh'] },
 { bits: 3, name: 'rd\'' },
 { bits: 2, name: `uimm[2:1]` },
 { bits: 3, name: 'rs1\'' },
 { bits: 3, name: `uimm[5:3]` },
 { bits: 3, name: 0x5, attr: ['xw.c.sh'] },
]}
```